lengto 0.6 - portable image measurement
Windows 10/11 x64. One executable, no installation.
Project website: https://github.com/IvanPanzera/lengto

GET STARTED
Open lengto.exe and open or drag in a TIFF, PNG, JPEG or PDF.
Use Ctrl+V or File > Paste to paste an image from the clipboard.
Choose Measurements > Calibrate, enter a known distance and its unit,
then click the two endpoints of the reference. Choose Measure and click
endpoint pairs to create measurements. Press Esc to leave the tool.
Save or export the annotated drawing as TIFF, JPEG, PNG or PDF.

MENUS
File: Open, Paste, Save, Save as, Export, Run script, Close.
Measurements: Calibrate, Measure, Settings.
Script: Start recording, Stop recording.
Fit: fit the whole page in the window.
?: Guide, GitHub, About. The Guide also has a GitHub button.
Confirm applies a dialog; Esc or the close button cancels it.

PASTE AN IMAGE
The empty window shows only "open, drop or paste".
Copy an image in another application and press Ctrl+V in lengto, or use
File > Paste. PNG, DIB/DIBV5 and Windows bitmap clipboard data are supported.
A copied image/PDF file from File Explorer can also be pasted.
The clipboard is read without changing it. Text alone is not an image.
Transparency is displayed over white. The pasted image keeps its source
pixel grid and uses the same calibration, measurement and export tools.
It stays in memory until closed; Save asks where to write it.
Pasting replaces the open document after the normal unsaved-work prompt.
Ctrl+V inside a text field continues to paste text into that field.

CALIBRATION
One uniform calibration applies to the whole document, including all pages.
Calibrate lets you change its value or unit. Segment lets you replace the
reference endpoints, including on another page. Esc cancels replacement.
All measurements update when the calibration changes. The reference is
drawn only on the page where it was defined.
The program does not correct perspective, lens distortion or scan deformation.
Use a known reference on the same plane as the features being measured.
Both a decimal point and a decimal comma are accepted for the known length.

MEASUREMENT AND PIXEL SNAP
Each pair of clicks creates a separate measurement. Measure remains active
until Esc, including after pan, zoom, Settings, saving or changing pages.
Changing pages cancels an unfinished segment but keeps completed measurements.
Each endpoint snaps to the center of the selected pixel. Two clicks on the
same pixel do not create a zero-length measurement. Hold Shift while placing
the second point to constrain the segment horizontally or vertically.
Outside the Measure tool, click a measurement to select it. Delete removes
it. Right-click a measurement to change its name or replace its segment.

PAN, ZOOM AND PAGES
Hold and drag the left mouse button to pan, including during a measurement.
The mouse wheel zooms around the pointer. At full preview resolution, a
single image pixel can fill the larger dimension of the viewport.
Fit or F restores the whole-page view.

For multipage TIFF and PDF files, click the bottom left/right arrow to go
directly to the previous/next page. No page dialog opens.
Click the current page number in the "1 / 18" indicator to type a page
number in place. Enter applies it; Esc cancels it. Moving focus elsewhere
also applies it. Numbers outside the document range use the nearest page.
Page Up and Page Down also change pages. Disabled arrows mark the first and
last page. Page controls are disabled while a script is running.

SETTINGS
Measurement unit and rounding precision share one dialog.
Available units: Å, nm, µm, mm, cm, dm, m, dam, hm, km, Mm, Gm, AU, Tm, Pm, ly.
The display unit is independent of the calibration unit.
Precision is a rounding step in metres: integer powers from 10^-10 to 10^16.
The initial value is 10^-3 m (1 mm). Changing units keeps the same step.
Only displayed and exported labels are rounded; the original coordinates
and calculated lengths remain unchanged. Rounding does not improve accuracy.

SAVE AND EXPORT
Save asks for an output file the first time; later saves update that file.
Save as chooses another destination and format. The input file is preserved.
TIFF and PDF can save all pages. JPEG and PNG save the current page only.
Export lets you select a format and, for TIFF/PDF, the page scope.
The last successful output becomes the destination for the next Save.
If annotations remain unsaved on other pages, the document stays marked as
modified. Closing a modified document offers to save it.

Output contains the complete page with flattened annotations, regardless
of pan or zoom. While the original stays open, measurements remain editable
and repeated exports do not accumulate annotations. Reopening an exported
image does not restore editable measurements. There is no project format;
a recorded macro and the source image can reproduce a measurement session.

Exports use the preview resolution. PDFs use a 144 dpi reference raster.
Large images may have a reduced preview. PNG, TIFF and PDF output use lossless
compression; JPEG uses quality 95. Writes use a temporary file and atomic
replacement so a failed export preserves any previous destination file.

RECORD A PYTHON MACRO
1. Script > Start recording works even with no document open.
2. Select Relative or Absolute coordinates.
3. Open a drawing, calibrate, measure and optionally save/export.
4. Script > Stop recording asks where to save the .py file.

REC in the title and status bar means recording is active. Canceling the
script save dialog or a failed write leaves the recording available.
Closing lengto while recording asks you to save the macro.
Recording does not require Python.

The macro records document open/close, page changes, settings, calibration,
measurements, edits, deletions and successful save/export operations.
Pan, zoom and incomplete segments are not recorded. Starting with an open
document also records its initial calibration, measurements and current page.
The file references opened source documents on disk. Pasted images are
included as lossless PNG data in the macro so replay does not depend on the
clipboard or a temporary file. This makes those macro files larger.

The .py starts with COORDINATES and an editable run() function, followed
by its embedded Python support. No extra Python packages are needed.

COORDINATES AND RGB
Every recorded endpoint contains all three values, for example:
  Point(absolute=(345, 120),
        relative=(Fraction(345, 65634), Fraction(120, 40000)),
        rgb=(28, 31, 35))

Indices start at zero in the top-left corner. X goes right; Y goes down.
The example refers to an image 65634 pixels wide and 40000 pixels high.
Relative fractions use index/width and index/height, independently of zoom.
Replay selects floor(fraction * current_dimension) and measures between
pixel centers. Exact fractions reproduce the same pixels at the same size.

COORDINATES = "relative" adapts positions to corresponding resized images;
"absolute" repeats the original indices. The --coordinates option can
override the setting. Relative replay assumes matching framing and aspect
ratio; it does not align rotated, shifted, cropped or distorted images.

RGB contains three integers in 0..255 from the original raster, including
when the preview is reduced. PDF colors are sampled on its 144 dpi raster.
Transparency is composited over white. Annotations added by lengto do not
affect sampling; annotations already present in the input image do.
Stored RGB does not automatically relocate an endpoint. Use find_pixels()
explicitly to select pixels by color or a custom condition.

RUN A SCRIPT
Choose File > Run script. Operations appear in the current window.
Before starting, you can save current edits. During execution, Esc stops
Python and its child processes. Completed operations remain applied.
Errors and print() output are shown at the end, retaining the last 8 KiB.
A native operation already in progress finishes before Esc is handled.

Running macros requires Python 3.8 or later. lengto looks for py.exe or
python.exe; otherwise it asks you to choose one. A portable interpreter
works. The choice lasts for the session; LENGTO_PYTHON can specify a path.
lengto does not download or install Python. Scripts are normal Python
programs and can read/write files with your user permissions.

From a terminal, without the lengto window:
  python macro.py --lengto "C:\tools\lengto.exe"
  python macro.py --input "drawing.tif" --output "measured.pdf"
  python macro.py --coordinates absolute

Put lengto.exe beside the macro, or use --lengto, LENGTO_EXE or PATH.
--input replaces the first recorded open operation. --output replaces the
first recorded export. With only --input, the first output uses the input
stem plus _measured and the recorded extension. Later paths stay literal
unless you parameterize them. Record an export or add app.export() if the
macro should produce a file.

PYTHON API
app.open(path), app.close(), app.page(number) with pages numbered from 1.
app.open_image(png_bytes): open PNG bytes, including embedded clipboard images.
app.info(): dimensions, current page, page count, measurement count, settings.
app.settings(unit="mm", precision=-3): rounding step exponent in metres.
app.calibrate(start, end, value=5, unit="m"): define or update the one scale.
m = app.measure(start, end, name="Spacing"): create a measurement.
app.edit_measurement(m, start, end, name="New name"): edit a measurement.
app.delete_measurement(m): delete a measurement.
app.export("measured.pdf", all_pages=True): format follows the extension.
p = app.pixel(x, y): Point containing coordinates and source RGB.
app.find_pixels(...): yield matching points from the source image.

A plain (x, y) pair always uses absolute indices. Point uses the session's
coordinate mode; calibrate/measure/edit_measurement also accept
coordinates="absolute" or "relative" for an individual operation.
m.metres is the unrounded distance in metres; m.value uses the display unit;
m.rounded is rounded in that unit. m.unit and m.id identify the result.
Returned Python values do not update when the calibration later changes.
Measurement names can contain up to 79 characters.

EXAMPLE: MEASURE BETWEEN DARK PIXELS ON SELECTED ROWS
Inside run(), after app.open() and calibration:

    width = app.info()["width"]
    for y in (200, 300, 400):
        points = list(app.find_pixels(
            predicate=lambda r, g, b: max(r, g, b) < 100,
            region=(0, y, width, y + 1)))
        if len(points) >= 2:
            left = min(points, key=lambda p: p.absolute[0])
            right = max(points, key=lambda p: p.absolute[0])
            m = app.measure(left, right, name=f"Row {y}")
            print(y, m.metres, "m")
    app.export(output_file or "edges.pdf")

Adapt rows, thresholds and regions to your image. Text and other lines can
also become endpoints; this is not automatic CAD recognition.

Other searches:
  app.find_pixels(rgb=(255, 0, 0), tolerance=15)
  app.find_pixels(predicate=lambda r, g, b: r > 180 and g < 80 and b < 80)

Tolerance is the maximum difference in each RGB channel. It helps with
JPEG and scans where one line contains slightly different pixel colors.
region=(left, top, right, bottom) uses absolute indices; right/bottom are
excluded. step=2 samples every second pixel along both axes. limit=100
stops after 100 matches; omit it to return all. With rgb and predicate,
both conditions must match. Results are yielded in blocks.
Measurements can be created during a search; do not change its document
or page while iterating. The limit is 4096 drawn measurements per document;
scripts can inspect more pixels or write numerical results using Python csv.

BATCH EXAMPLE
Save this beside a recording named macro.py:

    from pathlib import Path
    from macro import Lengto, COORDINATES, run

    with Lengto(r"C:\tools\lengto.exe", COORDINATES) as app:
        for file in sorted(Path(r"C:\drawings").glob("*.tif")):
            output = file.with_name(file.stem + "_measured.pdf")
            run(app, input_file=str(file), output_file=str(output))

Record an open, calibration, measurements and export. Each new document
starts without annotations. You can add loops, conditions and CSV reports.
Macros recorded by version 0.5 retain their embedded API and still use
the same engine protocol. Newly recorded macros use English API names.

SHORTCUTS
Ctrl+O: Open. Ctrl+V: Paste. Ctrl+S: Save. Ctrl+Shift+S: Save as. Ctrl+E: Export.
Ctrl+W: Close document. F1: Guide. C: Calibrate. M: Measure. F: Fit.
Esc: leave the current tool or stop a running script.
Page Up/Page Down: previous/next page. Delete: delete selected measurement.

PERFORMANCE AND PORTABILITY
Only one preview page is decoded at a time. Its limit is 24 Mi pixels
(96 MiB for the main pixel buffer) and 32768 pixels per side.
Large images use a reduced preview/export; snapping and RGB sampling still
use the original raster grid. PDF input uses 144 dpi. Memory also depends
on codecs, document complexity, source sampling and export buffers.
Password-protected PDFs, area measurement and FITS/WCS are not supported.

The executable contains losslessly compressed PDF engine, guide, licenses
and Python support. Windows decompresses resources as needed; no extra
runtime is installed. PDFium is extracted to a private temporary folder,
loaded only from there, then removed after normal exit. TEMP must be writable.
No extra file is required beside the EXE for manual use or recording.
No .NET, Java or Visual C++ Redistributable is required to run lengto.
Python is optional and needed only to execute macros.
No profiles, registry settings or services are installed. Use ? > GitHub
or the Guide's GitHub button to open the project website in your browser.
